---
title: "AST Nodes Configuration Pane"
page-title: "AST Nodes Configuration Pane - SyntaxEditor Language Designer Tool"
order: 4
---
# AST Nodes Configuration Pane

The AST Nodes configuration pane is used to design the type-specific AST node classes that can be code generated by the Language Designer, and used with the [LL(*) Parser Framework](../ll-parser-framework/index.md).

Type-specific AST nodes, described in more detail in the general [AST nodes](../text-parsing/parsing/ast-nodes.md) topic, are distinct classes designed to represent each type of AST node that a language grammar can create.  The features described in this topic make it easy to configure type-specific AST nodes for a language grammar, and fully code generate those node classes.

## Pane Layout

The AST Nodes configuration pane contains two lists, one above the other.  The upper list displays the AST node classes defined for the language, which can be code generated.  The lower list displays the properties that will be code generated for the selected AST node in the upper list.

The **Properties** tool window is heavily used with this pane, since it allows for the changing of configuration settings for the nodes and their properties.  Whichever list was focused last is the one that the **Properties** tool window considers active.

Note that multiple items can be selected in either list and the **Properties** window allows you to change common values among all the selected instances.  This is useful when changing the base type of multiple AST nodes, etc.

## AST Node Configuration

AST node configuration is done by modifying items in the upper list.

### Adding AST Nodes

To add AST nodes, click the **Add** button in the ribbon.  A dialog will appear asking you for the keys of the new AST nodes.  Enter one key per line, where each key conforms to standard identifier syntax since they will be used as the class name in code generation.  A new AST node is created for each key that you enter.

For instance, if you are building a set of expression-related AST nodes for a syntax language, you might start with adding an **Expression** base AST node.  Then add other AST nodes with keys like **LiteralExpression**, **ParenthesizedExpression**, **UnaryExpression**, and so on and set each of their **Inherits** values to be the base **Expression** AST node.  That way, any productions in your grammar that deal with general expressions can return an AST node of type **Expression** and any of the expression implementation AST node types can be returned since they inherit **Expression**.

### Updating AST Nodes

Select one or more AST nodes in the upper list and use the **Properties** tool window to modify their properties.  You can double-click an AST node in the list to open the Properties tool window.

A **description** is a text description of the node, used in code generation comments.

The **inherits** property indicates the base class for the AST node.  If left blank, the default AST node base class will be used.  A drop-down is provided, allowing for quick selection of any AST node already defined for the language.

### Removing AST Nodes

AST nodes can be removed by either selecting the items in the upper list and clicking the ribbon's **Remove** button (after focusing the list), or by clicking the ribbon's **Clear** button, which will remove all of them.

## AST Node Property Configuration

AST node property configuration is done by modifying items in the lower list.  The lower list displays the properties to code generate for the selected AST node in the upper list.

### Adding Properties

To add properties, first select the target AST node in the upper list, then click the lower list to focus it, and click the **Add** button in the ribbon.  A dialog will appear asking you for the keys of the new properties.  Enter one key per line, where each key conforms to standard identifier syntax since they will be used as the property name in code generation.  A new property is created for each key that you enter.

For instance, a **ParenthesizedExpression** AST node would likely need a property named **ChildExpression** added, which would be an **AstNode** property type, and its **Type** would be **Expression**.

### Updating Properties

Select one or more properties in the lower list and use the **Properties** tool window to modify their properties.  You can double-click a property in the list to open the Properties tool window.

A **description** is a text description of the property, used in code generation comments.

The **property type** property indicates the kind of property to generate, which is one of these options:

- **Simple** – Gets or sets a simple CLR type object.  Supported types are strings, ints, bools, enums, and flags enums.
- **SimpleList** – Gets an IList<T> containing a collection of strings, ints, bools, or enums.
- **AstNode** – Gets or sets an AST node object.
- **AstNodeList** – Gets an IList<T> containing a collection of AST nodes.

The property types that relate to child AST nodes are separated out since code generation will add special code to generated AST node classes to allow those to be enumerated through as child nodes.

The **type** property specifies the `Type` returned by the property, which can be an AST node type name, a string, etc.

### Removing Properties

Properties can be removed by either selecting the items in the lower list and clicking the ribbon's **Remove** button (after focusing the list), or by clicking the ribbon's **Clear** button, which will remove all of them.

## Code Generation

Any AST nodes defined in this pane will show in the [list of files](code-generation.md) that can be code generated.

The generated classes for AST nodes fully implement [IAstNode](xref:ActiproSoftware.Text.Parsing.IAstNode) and can be used with the [LL(*) Parser Framework](../ll-parser-framework/index.md)'s tree construction mechanism.

The classes are output with a **partial** modifier so that they can be extended as needed with other partial classes in the same project.
