---
title: "Overview"
page-title: "SyntaxEditor Language Designer Tool"
order: 1
---
# Overview

The **Language Designer** tool is an application that has many helpful features for quickly developing language definitions.  It is an option when installing the @@PlatformName controls.

This application uses several of the WPF Studio control products, such as Bars, Docking & MDI, Editors, Navigation, PropertyGrid, and SyntaxEditor, and is a nice showcase of what you can do with our products.

Its main goal is to provide you with a user interface for creating a language project, which is essentially a profile about a syntax language.  Various language features such as a lexer and classification types can be configured and, in some cases, tested right within the application.  Then code generation can be performed to output code files that allow for a related syntax language to be used in your own applications with the SyntaxEditor control.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Since the **Language Designer** is written in WPF and thus runs on .NET Framework, it can only load other .NET Framework assemblies for debugging in the **LL Parser Debugger**.  This is described in more detail in the [LL Parser Debugger](ll-parser-debugger.md) topic.

## Getting Started

This topic covers essential information about using the application, such as how to start it, what is a language project, how to open/save language projects, use the ribbon user interface and Properties tool window, and get started defining the general properties for a language.

See the [Getting Started](getting-started.md) topic for more information.

## Lexer Configuration Pane

The lexer for a language is very important since it is a building block for supporting many language features such as tokenization, syntax highlighting, and more.

See the [Lexer Configuration Pane](lexer-config-pane.md) topic for more information.

## AST Nodes Configuration Pane

The **AST Nodes** configuration pane is used to design the type-specific AST node classes that can be code generated by the **Language Designer**, and used with the [LL(*) Parser Framework](../ll-parser-framework/index.md).

See the [AST Nodes Configuration Pane](ast-nodes-config-pane.md) topic for more information.

## Other Configuration Panes

The **Language Designer** has several other configuration panes that are described in this topic.

See the [Other Configuration Panes](other-config-panes.md) topic for more information.

## Building a Project

Once you have configured your language project and are ready to start testing it or generating code, it's time to build the project.  Building a project examines the project and reports whether there are any errors, warnings, or messages that you should be aware of.

See the [Building a Project](building-a-project.md) topic for more information.

## Live Test

The **Language Designer** Live Test pane allows you to try various aspects of your language out before performing any code generation.

See the [Live Test](live-test.md) topic for more information.

## Code Generation

The **Language Designer**'s main purpose is to generate code that allows you to load custom syntax languages at run-time in your applications.

See the [Code Generation](code-generation.md) topic for more information.

## LL Parser Debugger

The **Language Designer LL Parser Debugger** pane allows you to load an assembly which contains a non-abstract [ILLParser](xref:ActiproSoftware.Text.Parsing.LLParser.ILLParser) implementation class and debug the grammar.

See the [LL Parser Debugger](ll-parser-debugger.md) topic for more information.
